---
author: "Borneel Bikash Phukan"
title: "Staying Ahead: Avoiding Career Gaps in Software Development"
date: "17th November, 2024"
link: ""
description: "The software development industry in 2024 presents unique challenges for new graduates and career changers, as global economic shifts and advancements in AI reshape hiring practices. With companies prioritizing experienced developers, this article explores actionable strategies for students, fresh graduates, and aspiring developers to build competitive profiles, gain relevant experience, and stand out in a demanding tech landscape."
---

2024 has been a very intense year for new graduates and job seekers willing to pursue an entry-level position in software development. The global recession and the advent of artificial intelligence, primarily targeted towards automation of coding tasks, had made it even more difficult for fresh computer science graduates willing to make it into tech. Investors are getting wary of some IT startups jumping on the AI hype bandwagon, due to which employers are being very selective of who they hire and the positions they hire for. The era for training new developers and deploying them in active projects is long gone and employers prefer developers with experiences.

This blog article focuses on what a student pursuing a degree in computer science, a fresh graduate job seeker, or a career changer willing to enter the software development industry can do to enhance the profile necessary to meet the high requirements standards set forth by IT companies in 2024.

**Attending online courses**

For students currently enrolled in a degree course related to computer science, it must be noted that there is a vast disjoint between the skills acquired in the university classroom and the skills used in the industry. University courses often teach computer science fundamentals, which teach how a computer system works. However, to learn the skills necessary for the job profile, taking online courses that are more streamlined towards the skill is the first and most crucial step. This also applies to career changers with a non-computer science background who are willing to learn new skills required for their new job profile in the IT industry.

Platforms such as Udemy, EdX, Coursera, and YouTube are some of the best platforms for students or career changers to learn new skills. Instead of focusing on the preferred platform, completing a certificate, or doing as many courses as possible, it is more important to focus on learning the fundamentals and taking essential notes of the recurring fundamental topics. Often, the courses also include capstone projects, which are essential when learning new projects. Challenge yourself with the projects, and if possible, try to do it yourself and add new features that make the capstone project more than what it was supposed to showcase.

Learning through online courses is an investment of your time and efforts, and indeed it should be. Once you have the necessary knowledge and fundamentals, you unlock a gateway to using your programming or IT skills to create a product straight from your ideas or provide services to someone in need. A career in software development requires constant learning and keeping up to date with technologies and skills that undergo rapid development each year. Hence despite completion, it is always advisable to visit the course at least a few times a month to keep updated, especially when actively engaged with projects requiring those skills.

Finally, it must be noted that only learning is not enough. To practice and innovate over the skills learnt through these courses, building projects simultaneously while the skills are being learnt is always advisable. For example, while learning the frontend framework ReactJS, a javascript framework, I simultaneously developed a sample project that uses almost all the features like React states, Redux, and custom and inbuilt hooks, including some features of the capstone projects. In short, building mini-side projects while learning a new skill provides a practical approach to learning and hence helps in longer retention of the skills learnt. The next point elaborates more on the topic of developing your projects.

**Contribute to your projects**

After learning a new skill or when you feel confident after spending endless hours learning a particular skill or a set of skills, there is no better way to show off the concepts learned than by building mainstream projects with a practical use case to resolve practical problems. Often, developing a mainstream project requires more than one skill. For example, creating a complete shopping website requires a MERN or MEAN stack and other services like testing tools, hosting, and monitoring. This project indeed will involve working with skills like ReactJS with Typescript for developing the frontend aspects, NodeJS for developing the API endpoints, MongoDB and MySQL for developing relational and non-relational databases, Docker and Kubernetes for setting up the containers, testing tools like PlayWright, Cypress etc, and AWS for deploying and hosting. Although massive, this single sample project can showcase not just one or two but a multitude of skills, which provides a positive impression of your technical background and exposure to software development tools.

For showcasing your skills to potential recruiters or clients, Github or Gitlab are two of the most commonly used developer platforms where developers can create, store and share projects as public repositories. These platforms use Git, a version control system that allows the management of your project code directly from your system on platforms like Github and Gitlab. A special note for showcasing your frontend projects is that I highly recommend publishing the build version in free hosting platforms like Netllify or Github-pages. These platforms allow recruiters or clients to directly open the link and see what your actual project looks like when deployed.

Last but not least, maintain your project. Once you develop and share your project as a public repository in Github, you must constantly update the projects or at least update the packages being used in the project. This showcases a sense of commitment to the project that you developed and updated projects on Github, which provides a repository of components, features, and styles that can be used in future projects without needing to rewrite the code from scratch every time.

**Contribute to open-source projects**

Along with building and maintaining your projects occasionally, another activity that creates a really good impression of your skill is your willingness to contribute to trending open-source projects on the aforementioned platforms, such as GitHub and GitLab. For example, GitHub has many open-source repositories regularly maintained by contributors and owners, and projects are being used by other developers and users worldwide. In the vast sea of open-source repositories, it is pretty easy to find repositories that require using the skills you learnt and focusing on. Contribute to the repositories using the same programming language, libraries and frameworks you learned, fix issues pointed out by other contributors, and create pull requests. You might win a gift or badge from the repository owner or company if you are lucky enough.

Contributing to open-source projects is also an excellent way to interact with fellow contributors and people involved with the open-source project. A repository for a massive open source project can also have a discord server associated with it which is basically like a portal to a whole new community actively involved with the project. Sometimes a first impression of your profile's contribution map by the recruiter, prospective colleague or team leader might be a good starting point for an interview if you are looking for an opportunity. And there is no other shortcut to this than contributing to as many related open-source projects as possible.

**Freelance**

So you finally possess the skills and a few well-maintained portfolio projects you are eager to show off to your friends, potential recruiters, and colleagues? But have you considered making a profit off your skills? Of course, like any other software developer, our first instinct when we possess a sophisticated skillset is to join corporations or startups and actively contribute to the team, make a difference and receive a decent salary. But in an intense job market where competition is high is job security is practically non-existent, recruiters often require junior developers with real practical experiences where you have contributed to a team actively involved in the business. The question is, how can you achieve these “years of experience” when you don't have any practical experience or references to make you look more qualified? The answer is Freelancing.

Software development is perhaps the most versatile career that anyone can ever expect. That's also part of why the pandemic, there has been a sharp increase in the number of people pursuing coding boot camps or enrolling in computer science degrees just to get a job in IT, thereby making the job market more saturated. The demand for software developers with the right skills will never go away, even with the advent of AI, which is so good in writing error free code. Every business in the world has some IT infrastructure that requires some sort of web or software development and hence a software developer, even for a short term. Joining these small businesses as freelance developers is perhaps the best way an entry-level junior developer or a career changer can get the first experience working on actual production-grade projects.

There are countless freelancing websites through which one can look for any freelance gig works or clients looking for freelance developers with specific skills. Developers most commonly use freelance platforms like Upwork or Fiverr. Create an account on these platforms, sharpen your portfolio and send applications to the countless freelance advertisements. Receiving the first gig is not easy. For obvious reasons, clients are wary of developers with no initial experience, just like while looking for full time opportunities. However, once you receive a gig offer, you shouldn't have any issues with the next, provided you have an excellent client rating.

Client project often has particular durations within which you are expected to complete the task. You must remember that clients are reluctant to pay big money to developers just starting on platforms like Upwork or Fiverr. Hence, focus on building a reputation rather than earning massive money before you have a good portfolio and chain of client references. More about freelancing will be presented in my upcoming future articles.

**Turn problems into profit**

Now you already have the technical skills, your deployable projects showcasing your skills, and more. You have found your community of open-source contributors and have worked for some clients requiring expert services from you. This is not an overnight feat, but it takes at least two to three years to be good at it. Although freelancing can be a great side hustle for software developers in addition to your full-time job, one must remember that a full-time job, mainly as a software developer, thanks to entities like unreliability in the economy or the dominance of AI automation, is not so secure anymore. However, to have a stable and reliable income source that keeps you afloat by paying your bills and more, I highly suggest identifying problems and finding ways to monetise.
What does it exactly mean? Every industry, including software, has loopholes or gaps between one service and the other. The supply chain or distribution sector, for example, is responsible for connecting businesses with businesses or businesses to clients, but it still requires a massive amount of digitalisation. Another example. Business management tools for streamlining businesses or organisations require immense customisation for the specific industry or business. Understanding the use cases faced by other businesses in the same industry is an excellent way to acquire the problem, create software solutions with user-friendly interfaces and then market your software solution. This points to having an entrepreneurial spirit around your project.
I want to highlight that being a software developer does not simply mean writing code to complete specific tasks or solve LeetCode problems until someone notices your contributions. The technical skills you acquired to become a software developer provide you with the essential skills to set up your own business and work for yourself. A software developer is also an entrepreneur. And the good thing is you do not need physical entities to create a valuable product in this digital profession. After identifying a business problem, you need time, dedication, and a really good idea, which are enough to provide you with a stable source of income. Although it sounds pretty simple in this section, this requires a lot of rigorous work, and often if you have stakeholders or investors involved, you need to conform to specific external rules and regulations as well. Therefore, being willing to start a business based on your skills also depends on external factors, such as where you live and your initial budget and manpower you are willing to invest in. More about the topic of entrepreneurship will be published in upcoming articles.

**Share your knowledge as articles**

Thanks to the instability of the global economy, the unpredictability of job security, and the amount of stress involved with programming and day-to-day tasks, software developers face many challenges, and everyone has their own experiences. Sharing experiences with the community or newbies getting started with a career in technology is really important to keep up the motivation of software developers. Write blog articles, create X threads, and participate in Reddit or Discord conversations. Reminding developers that they don't always have to depend on the market and that finding an entry-level and uncertain job is not the only solution. Take your time, build something and start a small business. If you are lucky, any business can make it big. And if not, it always gives you a great learning experience with little financial loss.

So go ahead and learn those highly sought-after skills, build projects, freelance, and contribute to open source or projects of people you know. Finally, if you are motivated enough, create your product, interact with other markets and expand. Your dedicated efforts will go a long way.
